# Memory Management
- handles or manages primary memory. Memory management keeps track of each and every memory location either it is allocated to some process or it is free. 
- It checks how much memory is to be allocated to processes. It decides which process will get memory at what time. 
- It tracks whenever some memory gets freed or unallocated and correspondingly it updates the status.

## Logical and Physical Address Space
- An address generated by the CPU is a logical address. Logical address is also known a Virtual address.
- Address actually available on memory unit is a physical address. 
- Virtual and physical addresses are the same in compile-time and load-time address-binding schemes. 
- Virtual and physical addresses differ in execution-time address-binding scheme.
- The run-time mapping from virtual to physical address is done by the memory management unit (MMU)

## Contiguous Memory Management Technique
### Fixed/static partitioning 
- In fixed partitioning, memory is divided into fixed-sized partitions or blocks (non-overlapping), and each partition is assigned to a specific process or task.
- The size of each partition may or may not be the same
- The system allocates a predetermined amount of memory to each partition, which remains fixed throughout the execution.
- Fixed partitioning is relatively simple to implement and provides fast memory allocation. 
- However, it can lead to inefficient memory utilization due to fragmentation, especially when processes have varying memory

### Variable/dynamic partitioning 
- partitions are made during the run-time according to the process’s need instead of partitioning during system configuration.
- size of the partition will be equal to the incoming process.
- partition size varies according to the need of the process so that internal fragmentation can be avoided to ensure efficient utilization of RAM.
- number of partitions in RAM is not fixed and depends on the number of incoming processes and the Main Memory’s size.
- External Fragmentation: There will be external fragmentation despite the absence of internal fragmentation.
- Difficult Implementation

## Non-Contiguous Memory Management Technique
- Non-contiguous allocation involves the use of ```pointers to link``` the non-contiguous memory blocks allocated to a process. 
### Paging
- Paging is a technique in which physical memory is broken into blocks of the same size called pages (size is power of 2, between 512 bytes and 8192 bytes).
- Process of retrieving processes in the form of pages from the secondary storage into the main memory is known as paging.
- When a process is to be executed, it's corresponding pages are loaded into any available memory frames.
- pages can be stored at the different locations of the memory but the priority is always to find the contiguous frames
- Unlike paging, segment is having varying sizes and thus eliminates internal fragmentation. External fragmentation still exists but to lesser extent.

### Segmentation
- Segmentation is a technique to break memory into logical pieces where each piece represents a group of related information
- Segmentation divides processes into smaller subparts known as modules. The divided segments need not be placed in contiguous memory.
- Segmentation solves issue in paging where a function or piece of code is divided into pages without considering that the relative parts of code can also get divided. Hence, for the process in execution, the CPU must load more than one page into the frames so that the complete related code is there for execution.

Feature	Paging	Segmentation
Memory Division	Fixed-size pages	Variable-size segments
Address Translation	Page number and offset	Segment number and offset
Fragmentation	Internal fragmentation	External fragmentation
Logical View	Does not correspond to program structure	Corresponds to logical program structure
Allocation Complexity	Simple (fixed size)	Complex (variable size)
Protection and Sharing	Harder to implement	Easier to implement
Example	Each process page is mapped to any available frame	Each program segment mapped to contiguous memory
  
### Swapping
- Swapping is a mechanism in which a process can be swapped temporarily out of main memory to a backing store,
- And then brought back into memory for continued execution.
- interchange of data between virtual memory and real memory is called swapping and space on disk as “swap space”.
- Swap space, also known as virtual memory or paging space,

## Virtual Memory
- is a storage allocation scheme in which secondary memory can be addressed as though it were part of the main memory.
- Virtual Memory is a storage allocation scheme in which secondary memory can be addressed as though it were part of the main memory.
- technique that allows the execution of processes which are not completely available in memory.
- When a program needs more memory than is available in RAM, it temporarily moves some data to the secondary storage. This allows the computer to run larger programs and handle multiple tasks at once.
- advantage of this scheme is that programs can be larger than physical memory.
- Virtual memory is the separation of user logical memory from physical memory.

### Thrashing
- Thrashing refers to a situation where the system spends a significant amount of time and resources continuously swapping pages between physical memory (RAM) and secondary storage due toexcessive paging activity.
- In thrashing, the system is busy moving pages in and out of memory rather than executing useful work, leading to severe degradation in performance.

## Fragmentation
-  occurs when most of your available memory is allocated in a large number of non-contiguous blocks or chunks, leaving a significant portion of memory unallocated but unusable for typical scenarios.
### External Fragmentation
- fragmentation occurs when there is sufficient total memory space to satisfy a request, but the available memory is divided into small pieces, making it unusable for larger requests.
- Cause: frequently allocate and deallocate different sizes of memory, leading to gaps between allocated blocks.
### Internal Fragmentation
- Memory block assigned to process is bigger. Some portion of memory is left unused as it cannot be used by another process.
- when memory blocks are larger than the data being stored in them, resulting in wasted space within each block.
- allocated block is larger than the requested memory, leading to wasted space within the allocated block.
